Improve order lifecycle documentation (#1574)
PrestaShop/docs: development/orders-lifecycle/_index.md

---
title: Orders lifecycle
weight: 42
useMermaid: true
---

# Order lifecycle: Cart, Checkout, and Order

{{% notice note %}}

> Orders can be created from a cart either in Front Office (FO) by the customer or in Back Office (BO) `Sell -> Orders -> "Add new order"` by the shop admin. See [Add new order page]({{< relref "../page-reference/back-office/order/add-new-order" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Orders can be created from a cart, either in Front Office (FO) by the customer or Back Office (BO) `Sell -> Orders -> "Add new order"` by the shop employee. See [Add new order page]({{< relref "../page-reference/back-office/order/add-new-order" >}}).
```

{{% /notice %}}

## Carts

### Cart in Front Office (FO)

> In FO by default, a new empty cart is created in database everytime a customer signs in - this behavior can be adjusted in BO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In FO, by default, a new empty cart is created in the database every time a customer signs in - this behavior can be adjusted in BO
```

This setting you're writing about, is it `Re-display cart at login`? If so, make sure to test it on PrestaShop 8.0 and be more explicit. This setting is not about creating or not a cart. I think the setting saying "Re-display cart at login" is connected with the behavior, and we could explicitly explain this.

Author: ok, i will test, that's a statement that was present in the doc. thanks

`Configure -> Shop parameters -> Customer settings`. If customer is not signed in (guest) - the cart is created in database once
first product is being added into it. If guest already has a cart and signs in, the cart is assigned to him instead of
creating a new one.

<div class='mermaid'>
flowchart LR
   A(Guest with empty cart)-->|Add item to Cart|B{{Cart creation}}-->C(Cart)-->|Login|D{{Associate cart to customer}}-->F

>    A-->|Login|G{{Cart creation}}-->E{{Associate cart to customer}}-->F(Associated Cart)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A-->|Login|G{{Cart creation}}-->E{{Associate cart to customer}}-->F(Associated cart)
```

to be consistent

</div>

{{% notice note %}}
In FO, browser cookies are used to determine if current guest has a cart. This way guest can still see his previous cart
if he is visiting the shop from the same browser in a short period of time (the time depends on cookie settings, which
can be adjusted in BO `Configure -> Administration -> General "lifetime of front office cookies"`).
{{% /notice %}}

### Cart in Back Office (BO)

> When creating an order in the BO, a new empty cart is created once the customer is selected. An existing cart (already associated to the customer) can also be selected, or an existing order can be used to create a new cart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating an order in the BO, a new empty cart is created once the customer is selected. You can also choose an existing cart (already associated with the customer) or an existing order on which the new cart will base.
```

<div class='mermaid'>
flowchart LR

>    A{{Select Customer}}-->|Create new cart|E{{Cart creation}}-->G

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   A{{Select Customer}}-->|Create new cart|E{{Cart creation}}-->G
```

sometimes you write `Customer`, like in the entity name, sometimes `customer`, maybe it would be good to be consistent, I like to use `Cart`, `Customer`, when I'm writing about something that is related to the entity

   A-->|Use existing cart|B{{Select existing Cart}}-->F
   A-->|Create new cart from order|C{{Select existing Order}}-->D{{Cart creation from Order content}}-->G{{Associate cart to customer}}-->F(Associated Cart)
</div>

## The Checkout: from Cart to Order

For a Cart to convert to an Order, the following steps need to be completed:

<div class='mermaid' style="text-align: center">
flowchart TB
   A(Cart)-->|checkout-personal-information-step|B(Cart associated)

>    B-->|checkout-addresses-step|C(Cart addressed)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   B-->|checkout-addresses-step|C(Cart addressed)
```

it sounds weird, maybe "Cart: address added.", "Cart: shipping method selected", "Cart: payment method selected"

   C-->|checkout-delivery-step|D(Cart shipping configured)
   D-->|checkout-payment-step|E(Cart payment configured)
   E-->|Submit order|F(Order)
</div>

{{% notice note %}}

> Please note that if a cart contains only Virtual products, there is no `checkout-addresses-step` and `checkout-delivery-step`. It goes directly from `checkout-personal-information-step` to `checkout-payment-step`.

Reviewer: This is partially true, there's no delivery step, and there is an address step tho.

{{% /notice %}}

> 1. **Associate to customer** (checkout-personal-information-step): details like name, email, birthday etc. In FO you can either fill 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Associate to customer** (checkout-personal-information-step): details like name, email, birthday, etc. In FO you can either fill 
```

>    this information manually as guest (and optionally create new customer account) or login with existing customer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   this information manually as a guest (and optionally create a new customer account) or log in as an existing customer. 
```

>    In BO order creation you will be asked to select an existing customer before you can modify the existing cart or create a new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you create an order from BO, you will be asked to select an existing customer before modifying the existing cart or creating a new one.
```

2. **Select shipping and invoice addresses** (checkout-addresses-step): provide the shipping and invoice addresses information. 

>    Shipping (a.k.a. delivery) address is where the ordered products should be sent while the invoice address is where the invoice is sent. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The shipping (a.k.a. delivery) address is where the ordered products should be sent, while the invoice address is used as a document billing address.
```

   In FO, you can provide one address to be used as both - shipping and invoice. In BO, you must select shipping and invoice addresses 
   (the same address can also be selected for both - shipping and invoices). 

> 3. **Select shipping method and carrier** (checkout-delivery-step): after this step is complete you will need to select available carriers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Select a shipping method** (checkout-delivery-step): after this step is complete, you will need to select one of the available carriers
```

>    (carriers are searched by delivery address and can be modified by shop admin in Improve -> Shipping -> Carriers page). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   (carriers are searched by delivery address, sometimes the total weight of the products, their prices, and information about the customer (a group to which the customer belongs) and can be modified by shop employees on Improve -> Shipping -> Carriers page). 
```

>    Note - carrier will not be available if selected country or zone is disabled (in BO International -> Locations) or carrier shipping 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Note that the carrier will not be available if a selected country or zone is disabled (in BO International -> Locations) or carrier shipping 
```

   and locations settings are not configured.

> 3. **Select payment method** (checkout-payment-step): choose how to pay for the order. Shop admin can configure payment methods in 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Select payment method** (checkout-payment-step): choose how to pay for the order. Shop employees can configure payment methods in 
```

   BO Payment -> Payment methods.

>    All payments are handled by payment modules. Prestashop comes with 2 payment modules by default:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   All payments are handled by payment modules. PrestaShop comes with three payment modules by default:
```

it would be good to link `payment modules` to https://devdocs.prestashop-project.org/8/modules/payment/

also, there are three modules: cheque, wire, cash on delivery

    * ps_checkpayment - allows check payments.
    * ps_wirepayment - allows wire payments (bank transfers).

   {{% notice note %}}

>    Payment restrictions for currency, country, group and carrier can be configured in BO `Improve -> Payment -> Preferences`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      You can restrict the availability of the payment methods in FO by currencies, countries, and groups and map them to carriers (ship2pay). You can do that in BO `Improve -> Payment -> Preferences`.
```

   {{% /notice %}}

> 4. **Submit Order**: Once the order is submitted, a unique order reference is generated and certain records from a cart and related

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Submit Order**: Once the order is submitted, a unique order reference is generated, and certain records from a cart and related
```

   entities are added into following database tables:
    * `orders`
    * `order_history`
    * `order_detail`
    * `order_carrier`
    * `order_cart_rule` (if any discounts were applied)
    * `order_detail_tax` (if any taxes are applied)

{{% notice note %}}

> At this step, some important data is duplicated (in `order_detail`) to ensure product data will remain available in the order even if the product is deleted afterwards. Price information is also duplicated, to ensure the order amount will remain immutable. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this step, some important data is duplicated (in `order_detail`) to ensure product data will remain available in the order even if the product is deleted or modified afterward. Information about the prices is also duplicated to ensure the order amount will remain immutable.
```
